Yan et al. proposed PDMDA [26], which extracts miRNA feature representations via
fully connected networks, leverages GNNs to capture disease feature representations,
and designs a multi-layer structured classifier to predict miRNA-disease association
types. Zhang et al. regarded miRNA-disease associations as signed bipartite networks,
and proposed a signed GNN method SGNNMD [27] for predicting the upregulated/-
downregulated expression types of miRNAs in diseases. SGNNMD extracts subgraphs
surrounding known miRNA-disease associations, learns the structural features of these
subgraphs through node feature extraction and GNNs, and integrates such structural
features with biological features to construct a prediction model. Wang et al. devel-
oped NMCMDA [28], which applies relational GCNs to miRNA-disease heterogeneous
networks for learning the latent space embeddings of miRNAs and diseases respec-
tively, and utilizes a neural multi-relational decoder to calculate predictive scores for
miRNA-disease association types. Yu et al. designed mDLinker [29], which adopts
the node2vec graph representation learning to extract node features from disease and
miRNA similarity networks, captures topological information and multi-type nonlinear
relationships between miRNAs and diseases based on the GATNE heterogeneous graph
multi-relational model, and trains a random forest classifier to predict miRNA-disease
association types. Liu et al. [30] proposed deepMDpred, which combines GCN with a
multichannel attention mechanism to extract disease features from heterogeneous simi-
larity and gene interaction networks, and fuses the learned miRNA sequence-structural
features with disease representations via a nonlinear fully connected layer for multi-
type miRNA-disease association prediction. However, most GNN-based methods are
constrained by three limitations. First, calculating miRNA similarity based on known
miRNA-disease associations leads to excessive reliance on existing association data,
which not only creates circular dependencies that render the method ineffective for
novel miRNAs lacking prior disease annotations but also induces quantification bias
ARTICLE IN PRESS
ARTICLE IN PRESS